Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the stress response to surgery. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What is the stress response to surgery,
and what are its broad components?
The stress response to surgery is the coordinated neuroendocrine,
metabolic and immunological reaction of the body to the trauma of surgery and
injury, a stereotyped response whose evolutionary purpose is to maintain
homeostasis, mobilise energy substrate and defend the circulating volume so as to
survive injury and begin healing.
It is triggered by the tissue damage of operation and by the associated factors of
fasting, anxiety, haemorrhage, hypothermia and infection.
Its broad components are conventionally grouped into three interlinked arms.
First, a neuroendocrine response: activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
axis, releasing cortisol, and of the sympathoadrenal system,
releasing catecholamines, together with changes in many other hormones.
Second, a metabolic response: a catabolic,
hypermetabolic state characterised by hyperglycaemia with insulin resistance,
breakdown of protein and fat, and retention of salt and water.
Third, an inflammatory and immunological response:
the release of cytokines and the acute-phase reaction,
with later immunosuppression. These arms are integrated and proportional to the
magnitude of the surgical insult.
Although the response is protective in evolutionary terms,
in modern surgical practice an excessive or prolonged response is largely harmful,
causing catabolism, hyperglycaemia, immunosuppression and thrombosis,
and much of modern perioperative care aims to attenuate it.
So the stress response is the integrated neuroendocrine,
metabolic and inflammatory reaction to surgical trauma,
protective in origin but often harmful in excess,
and a central target of modern anaesthetic and enhanced-recovery care.
What afferent signals trigger and drive the stress response?
The stress response is initiated and sustained by afferent signals travelling from
the site of injury to the central nervous system and by humoral mediators released
from the wound, and understanding these afferent pathways is important because
blocking them is the basis of attenuating the response.
The principal trigger is neural: nociceptive and other afferent impulses from the
surgical wound travel by the peripheral sensory nerves and the spinal cord to the
hypothalamus and brainstem, where they activate the neuroendocrine and sympathetic
responses.
This afferent neural pathway is the dominant driver of the early hormonal response
to surgery on the trunk and limbs, which is precisely why a regional or neuraxial
block that interrupts these afferents before they reach the cord can so effectively
suppress the response.
Alongside the neural signals, humoral factors contribute:
the damaged tissue releases inflammatory mediators and cytokines into the
circulation, which act on the hypothalamus and elsewhere to drive and sustain the
response, and this humoral arm is less easily blocked by regional techniques and
becomes relatively more important in major and prolonged surgery.
Other afferent inputs include the effects of hypovolaemia and hypotension acting
through baroreceptors, of hypoxia and hypercapnia through chemoreceptors,
and of emotional stress, pain, fasting, hypothermia and acidosis.
So the stress response is triggered chiefly by nociceptive afferent neural traffic
from the wound, supplemented by humoral cytokine signals and by the inputs of
hypovolaemia, hypoxia, pain and emotional stress,
and interrupting the afferent neural pathway is the most effective means of
suppression.
Describe the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis response and the role of cortisol.
The activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis,
culminating in a sustained rise in cortisol,
is one of the central features of the neuroendocrine stress response,
and cortisol's actions account for much of the metabolic picture.
Afferent signals from the wound stimulate the hypothalamus to release
corticotrophin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the anterior pituitary to
release adrenocorticotrophic hormone,
which in turn stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete cortisol.
The normal diurnal rhythm and the usual negative feedback are overridden,
so that cortisol rises markedly — several-fold — and remains elevated for a period
proportional to the severity of surgery,
the feedback suppression of the axis being lost during the stress.
Cortisol then exerts wide-ranging effects that serve to mobilise energy substrate
and support the circulation.
Metabolically it is catabolic and promotes hyperglycaemia:
it stimulates gluconeogenesis and promotes protein breakdown and lipolysis to
supply the substrates, and it antagonises insulin,
contributing to insulin resistance.
It has permissive effects, enhancing the actions of catecholamines on the
cardiovascular system, helping to maintain vascular tone and blood pressure.
It has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects,
modulating the inflammatory response.
And it contributes to salt and water retention.
So the stress activates the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis to produce a
sustained, feedback-resistant rise in cortisol, whose catabolic, hyperglycaemic,
permissive cardiovascular and immunomodulatory actions are central to the metabolic
and circulatory features of the response.
Describe the sympathoadrenal response.
The sympathoadrenal response is the rapid neural and hormonal arm of the stress
response, providing the immediate cardiovascular and metabolic reaction to injury,
and it complements the slower steroid response.
Afferent signals and central activation increase the activity of the sympathetic
nervous system, with two effects. Directly,
increased sympathetic nerve activity releases noradrenaline at the nerve endings
throughout the body, raising heart rate, contractility, and vascular tone.
Hormonally, sympathetic stimulation of the adrenal medulla causes it to release
adrenaline, and some noradrenaline, into the circulation.
The plasma catecholamine concentrations rise rapidly and substantially with
surgery, in proportion to its severity.
The catecholamines produce the characteristic cardiovascular response —
tachycardia, increased cardiac output,
and increased blood pressure — which supports perfusion but increases myocardial
oxygen demand, a concern in the patient with coronary disease.
They also have important metabolic effects that reinforce those of cortisol:
adrenaline stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, raising blood glucose,
suppresses insulin secretion while stimulating glucagon, and promotes lipolysis,
all mobilising energy substrate.
They increase metabolic rate and oxygen consumption.
So the sympathoadrenal response is the immediate release of noradrenaline from
sympathetic nerves and of adrenaline from the adrenal medulla,
producing the tachycardia, increased cardiac output and raised blood pressure of
the stress response together with hyperglycaemia from glycogenolysis and insulin
suppression — the rapid arm that supports the circulation and mobilises fuel,
at the cost of increased myocardial work.
What other hormonal changes occur?
Beyond cortisol and the catecholamines,
the surgical stress provokes a broad shift in the endocrine system,
generally favouring the catabolic and fluid-conserving hormones over the anabolic
ones, and several specific changes are worth knowing.
Vasopressin, the antidiuretic hormone,
is released in large amounts in response to surgery, pain,
hypovolaemia and the afferent stimuli, promoting water retention by the kidney and,
at high concentrations, vasoconstriction,
contributing to the postoperative tendency to retain water and to a low plasma
sodium.
The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system is activated,
by sympathetic stimulation and by any fall in renal perfusion,
leading to the secretion of aldosterone,
which promotes sodium and water retention and potassium loss,
reinforcing the salt and water conservation.
Glucagon rises, contributing to hyperglycaemia by promoting glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis. Growth hormone is released and contributes to insulin resistance
and lipolysis. Prolactin rises.
On the other side, the anabolic and metabolically calming hormones are relatively
suppressed or ineffective: insulin secretion is initially suppressed by the
catecholamines and later, although it may rise,
its action is opposed by insulin resistance;
and the thyroid and gonadal hormones tend to fall.
So the hormonal response favours the catabolic and fluid-retaining hormones —
raised vasopressin, aldosterone, glucagon and growth hormone — while the anabolic
insulin is suppressed or resisted, producing the metabolic and fluid-conserving
pattern of the stress response.
Describe the metabolic response to surgery, beginning with carbohydrate metabolism.
The metabolic response to surgery is a catabolic,
hypermetabolic state driven by the hormonal changes,
and its handling of carbohydrate — producing the characteristic stress
hyperglycaemia — is among its most clinically important features.
The carbohydrate response has two elements that combine to raise the blood glucose.
First, increased glucose production: the counter-regulatory hormones — cortisol,
catecholamines, glucagon and growth hormone — stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and,
importantly, gluconeogenesis, so that the liver pours out glucose at an increased
rate.
Second, decreased glucose utilisation through insulin resistance:
insulin secretion is initially suppressed by the catecholamines,
and even when insulin is present its action is impaired,
the tissues becoming resistant to it,
so that glucose uptake into muscle and fat is reduced.
The combination of increased production and reduced peripheral uptake produces
stress hyperglycaemia, which is proportional to the severity of surgery and is a
hallmark of the response.
This hyperglycaemia, while providing fuel, is harmful in excess:
it is associated with impaired wound healing, increased infection,
and worse outcomes, particularly in the critically ill,
which is why perioperative glucose control matters — though very tight control
carries its own risk of hypoglycaemia, so a moderate target is sought.
The diabetic patient is especially affected,
the stress response markedly worsening glycaemic control.
So the carbohydrate response is increased hepatic glucose production combined with
insulin resistance, producing stress hyperglycaemia proportional to surgical
severity, which is harmful in excess and requires moderate perioperative glucose
control.
What happens to protein metabolism?
The protein response to surgery is one of accelerated breakdown of the body's
protein, producing a negative nitrogen balance,
and because the body's protein is functional tissue rather than a storage depot,
this catabolism has real consequences for recovery.
Under the influence of cortisol and the inflammatory cytokines,
and with the relative lack of effective insulin,
the rate of protein breakdown exceeds the rate of synthesis,
so that there is a net loss of body protein, principally from skeletal muscle.
The amino acids released are used as substrate for gluconeogenesis and for the
synthesis of acute-phase proteins and the proteins of healing and the immune
response, so the catabolism is, in part,
a redistribution of protein from muscle to the wound and the liver.
The nitrogen from the deaminated amino acids is converted to urea and excreted,
so that urinary nitrogen excretion rises and the patient is in negative nitrogen
balance — losing more nitrogen than is taken in.
The magnitude is proportional to the severity of injury, and in major surgery,
trauma and critical illness the loss of muscle can be substantial and rapid,
impairing strength, including respiratory muscle strength, mobility,
immune function and wound healing, and prolonging recovery.
Importantly, unlike simple starvation,
this catabolism is not readily suppressed by feeding alone.
So the protein response is accelerated net protein breakdown, chiefly of muscle,
driven by cortisol and cytokines, producing a negative nitrogen balance that
supplies substrate for gluconeogenesis and healing but at the cost of muscle
wasting that impairs recovery and is not abolished by feeding.
And fat metabolism?
The fat response to surgery is one of mobilisation,
the body drawing on its large adipose energy reserves to fuel the increased
metabolic demands of the stress state,
and it parallels the changes in carbohydrate and protein.
The hormonal milieu of the stress response — the raised catecholamines, cortisol,
glucagon and growth hormone, with suppressed or ineffective insulin — strongly
stimulates lipolysis, the breakdown of stored triglyceride in adipose tissue into
glycerol and free fatty acids.
The free fatty acids are released into the circulation and become a major fuel for
many tissues during the stress state,
undergoing beta-oxidation to provide energy and sparing glucose for the tissues
that depend on it; their oxidation contributes to the increased metabolic rate.
The glycerol released provides a substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis,
contributing to the hyperglycaemia.
If fat oxidation is very high and carbohydrate availability low,
ketone bodies may be produced, though the stress hyperglycaemia and residual
insulin usually limit ketosis compared with simple starvation.
This mobilisation of fat is generally well tolerated and provides a valuable,
abundant energy source.
So the fat response is hormonally driven lipolysis releasing free fatty acids as a
major fuel and glycerol as a gluconeogenic substrate,
mobilising the body's large fat reserves to meet the energy demands of the stress
state.
Many describe an 'ebb and flow' pattern. Explain this.
The ebb and flow description, originally proposed by Cuthbertson,
is a classic way of characterising the time course of the metabolic response to
major injury, dividing it into phases that differ in their metabolic and
haemodynamic character, and although a simplification it remains a useful framework.
The ebb phase is the initial, short period immediately following the injury,
lasting perhaps a day or so, dominated by the need to survive the immediate insult.
It is characterised by a reduction in metabolic rate, reduced cardiac output,
hypovolaemia or a tendency to shock,
hypothermia and a focus on preserving circulating volume and perfusion;
the body is, in a sense, hunkering down.
Catecholamine and cortisol levels are high,
and there may already be hyperglycaemia. The flow phase follows,
developing over the subsequent days and lasting for a period proportional to the
severity of injury.
It is the hypermetabolic, catabolic phase proper:
metabolic rate and oxygen consumption rise above normal, cardiac output increases,
and the catabolism of protein and fat,
the hyperglycaemia and the negative nitrogen balance are at their height;
this is the phase of mobilising substrate for healing.
The flow phase is itself sometimes divided into an early catabolic part and a later
anabolic recovery part, when the body begins to rebuild.
So the ebb phase is the early, hypometabolic,
circulation-preserving period after injury,
and the flow phase is the subsequent hypermetabolic,
catabolic period of substrate mobilisation and eventual recovery — a useful,
if simplified, description of the temporal pattern.
Explain the salt and water response.
A consistent feature of the stress response is the retention of salt and water by
the body, an adaptation to conserve circulating volume after the threat of
haemorrhage, and it has important implications for perioperative fluid management.
Several of the hormonal changes converge on this end.
Vasopressin, the antidiuretic hormone,
released in large amounts in response to the surgical stimuli,
pain and any reduction in volume, acts on the kidney to increase water
reabsorption, retaining free water.
The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system is activated,
and the resulting aldosterone acts on the renal tubule to retain sodium,
and with it water, while increasing potassium excretion.
Cortisol also contributes to sodium and water retention.
The net effect is a reduced urine output and the retention of sodium and water in
the early postoperative period, which can last a few days until the response
subsides.
The clinical importance is considerable:
it means that the postoperative patient has a tendency to retain administered fluid
and to develop oedema and, because water is retained relatively more than sodium
under vasopressin, a tendency to a low plasma sodium,
particularly if given excessive hypotonic fluid.
This underlies the modern caution against over-generous perioperative fluids and
the preference for balanced, restricted regimens.
So the salt and water response is the conservation of sodium and water by
vasopressin, aldosterone and cortisol,
reducing urine output and predisposing to fluid retention,
oedema and hyponatraemia — which is why judicious,
restricted fluid therapy is advised after surgery.
Describe the inflammatory and cytokine response.
Surgery and tissue injury provoke an inflammatory response, mediated by cytokines,
which constitutes the third arm of the stress response and links the local wound to
the systemic reaction, and it has both beneficial and harmful aspects.
Tissue damage activates the local innate immune cells,
which release cytokines — small signalling proteins that orchestrate inflammation.
The principal cytokines of the surgical stress response are the pro-inflammatory
mediators interleukin-one, tumour necrosis factor, and,
most prominently as a marker, interleukin-six,
which is released in proportion to the degree of tissue trauma and is the chief
driver of the systemic features.
These cytokines have local effects,
promoting the inflammation and healing of the wound, and systemic effects:
they act on the hypothalamus to contribute to the neuroendocrine response and to
produce fever, they stimulate the liver to mount the acute-phase response,
and they contribute to the metabolic catabolism.
The magnitude of the cytokine response, and of interleukin-six in particular,
reflects the severity of the surgical insult and correlates with the degree of the
stress response and with outcome.
An excessive cytokine response, as in major surgery, severe trauma or sepsis,
can produce a damaging systemic inflammatory response.
This inflammatory arm, being humoral,
is less effectively suppressed by regional anaesthesia than the neuroendocrine arm.
So the inflammatory response is the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
chiefly interleukin-six, in proportion to tissue trauma,
driving the systemic features, the acute-phase response and part of the catabolism,
beneficial for healing but harmful in excess and relatively resistant to neural
blockade.
What is the acute-phase response?
The acute-phase response is the systemic reaction of the body to inflammation and
injury, orchestrated chiefly by the cytokines,
and characterised by a change in the pattern of proteins synthesised by the liver
and by a constellation of systemic features.
Under the influence of the inflammatory cytokines, especially interleukin-six,
the liver alters its protein production:
it increases the synthesis of a group of proteins called the positive acute-phase
proteins, while decreasing the synthesis of others,
the negative acute-phase proteins.
The positive acute-phase proteins include C-reactive protein,
which rises dramatically and is the most commonly measured clinical marker of the
response and of inflammation or infection; fibrinogen,
contributing to the hypercoagulable state and to the raised erythrocyte
sedimentation rate; haptoglobin; and complement and other defensive and clotting
proteins, which support the inflammatory and healing processes.
The negative acute-phase proteins, whose synthesis falls, include albumin,
which is why serum albumin drops after major surgery and in illness,
and transferrin.
Beyond the protein changes, the acute-phase response includes systemic features
such as fever, leucocytosis, and the metabolic changes already described.
The rise in C-reactive protein and the fall in albumin are familiar clinical
markers of this response.
So the acute-phase response is the cytokine-driven,
liver-mediated shift in protein synthesis — raised C-reactive protein,
fibrinogen and other defensive proteins,
with reduced albumin — together with fever and leucocytosis,
the systemic expression of the inflammatory response to surgery.
What haematological and coagulation changes accompany the stress response?
The stress response is accompanied by characteristic haematological and coagulation
changes that tip the balance towards a prothrombotic, hypercoagulable state,
and these are clinically important because of the resulting risk of perioperative
thrombosis.
Several changes contribute. The acute-phase response increases the synthesis of
clotting factors, notably fibrinogen and factor eight,
raising the concentration of procoagulant proteins.
Platelet number and reactivity tend to increase.
At the same time, the activity of the natural anticoagulant and fibrinolytic
systems may be relatively reduced, at least transiently,
further shifting the balance towards clotting;
an early increase in fibrinolysis may be followed by a period of fibrinolytic
shutdown.
The catecholamines and the stress also increase platelet activation.
The net effect is a hypercoagulable state in the perioperative period.
Combined with the venous stasis of immobility and any endothelial injury from
surgery — completing Virchow's triad — this hypercoagulability substantially
increases the risk of venous thromboembolism,
deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism,
which is why thromboprophylaxis with mechanical measures and anticoagulants is a
routine and important part of perioperative care.
There is also commonly a leucocytosis as part of the response,
and a fall in haemoglobin from blood loss and haemodilution.
So the stress response produces a hypercoagulable state — raised fibrinogen and
clotting factors, increased platelet reactivity and reduced fibrinolysis — which,
with stasis and endothelial injury,
raises the risk of venous thromboembolism and mandates thromboprophylaxis.
How does the magnitude and duration of the response relate to the surgery,
and over what timescale does it occur?
A fundamental principle of the stress response is that its magnitude and duration
are proportional to the severity of the surgical insult,
a graded relationship that has direct practical consequences for anaesthetic
planning and for the choice of surgical approach.
The size of the response correlates with the extent of tissue trauma: minor,
superficial or peripheral surgery provokes only a small and brief response,
whereas major surgery — particularly major abdominal,
thoracic and vascular surgery — provokes a large and prolonged one.
Factors that increase the response include the extent of tissue damage,
the duration of surgery, blood loss, hypothermia, infection or sepsis,
and inadequate analgesia, while good analgesia,
minimal access techniques and the avoidance of these aggravating factors reduce it.
As for timescale, the neuroendocrine and sympathoadrenal responses begin
essentially immediately with the surgical stimulus,
with cortisol and catecholamines rising within minutes to hours.
The hormonal response, in uncomplicated surgery,
peaks in the first few hours and subsides over a day or two for moderate surgery,
persisting longer after major surgery.
The metabolic, catabolic flow phase develops over the first day and may continue
for days to weeks after major injury. The cytokine and acute-phase response,
marked by interleukin-six and C-reactive protein,
rises over hours and peaks within a day or two.
So the response is graded to the severity of surgery,
beginning immediately and lasting from a day or so after minor surgery to weeks
after major trauma — a proportionality that means reducing the surgical insult
reduces the response.
Is the stress response beneficial or harmful?
The stress response is best understood as an adaptation that was beneficial in the
evolutionary context of injury without medical care but that,
in the setting of modern surgery with its supportive care,
is largely unnecessary and, in excess,
harmful — a shift in perspective that underlies the modern aim of attenuating it.
In its origin, the response is protective:
it mobilises energy substrate from glycogen,
fat and protein to fuel the response to injury and the work of healing when food
cannot be obtained; it conserves salt and water to defend the circulating volume
against the threat of continued haemorrhage;
it supports the circulation through the catecholamines;
it provides the proteins and cells of inflammation and healing;
and the hypercoagulability limits bleeding.
For an injured animal without medical support, these are advantageous.
In modern surgical practice, however, where fluid, blood, nutrition,
analgesia and physiological support are provided,
these adaptations are largely redundant, and their excess becomes harmful:
the catabolism wastes muscle and impairs healing, immunity and recovery;
the hyperglycaemia impairs wound healing and increases infection;
the salt and water retention causes oedema and hyponatraemia;
the hypercoagulability causes thromboembolism;
and the cardiovascular and metabolic demands stress the diseased heart.
The balance of modern evidence is that attenuating the response improves recovery.
So the stress response is protective in its evolutionary origin but,
in the supported modern surgical patient, largely redundant and, in excess,
harmful — which is why reducing it is a goal of modern care.
How can the stress response be attenuated? Begin with regional and neuraxial
anaesthesia.
Because the stress response is driven substantially by afferent neural signals from
the wound, the most effective single means of attenuating it is regional or
neuraxial anaesthesia, which interrupts those afferents before they reach the
central nervous system, and this is a major part of the rationale for these
techniques.
A neuraxial block — spinal or, particularly,
epidural anaesthesia — that blocks the afferent nerve traffic from the surgical
site can profoundly suppress the neuroendocrine response to surgery on the lower
body, markedly attenuating the rise in cortisol, catecholamines and glucose,
especially for lower abdominal, pelvic and lower limb surgery.
The effect is greatest when the block is established before surgery and maintained,
covering the full afferent pathway,
and when it is dense enough to block the relevant fibres.
The suppression is most complete for procedures below the umbilicus,
where a neuraxial block can cover all the afferent input;
for upper abdominal and thoracic surgery the block is less able to cover the full
afferent supply, including vagal and phrenic pathways,
so the suppression is incomplete.
Importantly, regional techniques suppress chiefly the neuroendocrine,
neurally-mediated arm; the humoral cytokine response is less affected.
Peripheral nerve and plexus blocks similarly attenuate the response from their
territory.
So regional and neuraxial anaesthesia attenuate the stress response by blocking the
afferent neural drive, most effectively for lower-body surgery and when established
before and maintained throughout the operation,
suppressing the neuroendocrine arm more than the humoral cytokine arm.
What other anaesthetic and pharmacological means attenuate the response?
Beyond regional anaesthesia, a number of anaesthetic and pharmacological measures
attenuate the stress response, generally by blunting the afferent signalling,
the central response or the hormonal output, and they are used in combination.
Opioids are effective: high-dose opioid techniques suppress the
hypothalamic–pituitary and sympathetic responses,
which is part of the rationale for opioid-based anaesthesia in cardiac and major
surgery, though at the cost of opioid side-effects and delayed recovery.
Adequate depth of general anaesthesia itself reduces the response,
and the intravenous and volatile agents have some suppressive effect,
with deeper anaesthesia blunting the sympathetic reaction;
etomidate is a notable special case, as it suppresses adrenal cortisol synthesis,
which is undesirable in the critically ill.
Alpha-two agonists such as clonidine and dexmedetomidine reduce the sympathetic
response. Beta-blockers blunt the cardiovascular consequences of the catecholamine
surge.
Good analgesia by any route reduces the response by reducing the nociceptive
afferent drive, so multimodal analgesia contributes.
Glucocorticoids given perioperatively, as for nausea, modulate the inflammatory arm.
Maintaining normothermia, avoiding hypovolaemia and hypoxia,
and minimising fasting all remove aggravating stimuli.
So pharmacological attenuation uses opioids, adequate anaesthetic depth,
alpha-two agonists and beta-blockade,
supported by multimodal analgesia and the avoidance of aggravating factors such as
hypothermia, hypovolaemia and prolonged fasting — a combination layered on top of
regional techniques where possible.
How do surgical approach and enhanced recovery programmes fit in?
The surgical approach itself is a powerful determinant of the stress response,
and the modern enhanced-recovery-after-surgery programmes are, in large part,
a systematic effort to minimise the response and its consequences,
integrating many of the measures already discussed.
Because the response is proportional to tissue trauma,
minimally invasive surgery — laparoscopic and other minimal-access techniques —
provokes a smaller response than open surgery, with less tissue damage,
less pain and a smaller metabolic and inflammatory reaction,
contributing to the faster recovery seen with these approaches.
Enhanced recovery programmes bundle together evidence-based measures that,
among other aims, attenuate the stress response and support the patient through it.
These include avoiding prolonged preoperative fasting and giving carbohydrate
drinks before surgery to reduce the fasted, insulin-resistant state;
using regional anaesthesia and multimodal,
opioid-sparing analgesia to block afferent drive and control pain;
minimal-access surgery; maintaining normothermia and euvolaemia with judicious,
balanced fluid therapy to avoid both hypovolaemia and overload;
early resumption of oral nutrition to counter catabolism;
and early mobilisation to reduce thrombosis and muscle loss.
The combined effect is a reduced stress response,
fewer complications and faster recovery.
So minimally invasive surgery reduces the response by reducing tissue trauma,
and enhanced recovery programmes systematically attenuate it and its effects
through carbohydrate loading, regional analgesia, normothermia, euvolaemia,
early nutrition and mobilisation — the practical embodiment of stress-response
modulation.
What are the consequences of an exaggerated or prolonged stress response?
An exaggerated or prolonged stress response, as occurs with major surgery,
severe trauma, sepsis or inadequately controlled pain,
produces a series of harmful consequences across the organ systems,
and avoiding them is the clinical justification for attenuating the response.
The catabolic consequences are prominent:
severe and sustained protein breakdown causes muscle wasting and weakness,
including of the respiratory muscles,
impairing ventilation and the ability to cough,
and weakness delays mobilisation and recovery;
the negative nitrogen balance impairs wound healing and immune function.
The metabolic consequence of marked hyperglycaemia impairs wound healing,
predisposes to infection and worsens outcomes, especially in the critically ill.
The immunological consequence, a compensatory immunosuppression following the
inflammatory phase, increases susceptibility to postoperative and nosocomial
infection. The haematological consequence, hypercoagulability,
increases the risk of venous thromboembolism.
The cardiovascular consequences of the catecholamine surge — tachycardia,
hypertension and increased myocardial oxygen demand — can precipitate ischaemia,
arrhythmia and cardiac events in the patient with cardiac disease.
The fluid consequences of salt and water retention cause oedema and hyponatraemia.
There may be psychological and cognitive effects.
In sum, the exaggerated response contributes to many of the complications of major
surgery.
So a prolonged stress response causes muscle wasting and weakness,
impaired healing, hyperglycaemia, immunosuppression and infection, thromboembolism,
and cardiac stress — the very complications that attenuating the response seeks to
prevent.
Comment on the implications for the patient on steroids or with adrenal
insufficiency.
The relationship between the stress response and the adrenal cortex has an
important practical corollary for patients whose adrenal response may be impaired —
those on long-term corticosteroids and those with adrenal insufficiency — because
they may be unable to mount the cortisol response that the stress of surgery
demands.
Normally, surgery triggers a large rise in cortisol proportional to its severity,
and this cortisol is essential to the cardiovascular and metabolic adaptation;
without it, the patient may suffer cardiovascular collapse — an adrenal,
or Addisonian, crisis — under the stress of surgery.
Patients who have taken significant doses of exogenous corticosteroids for a
sufficient period have suppression of their own hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis
through negative feedback, so that the axis cannot respond to stress; similarly,
patients with primary or secondary adrenal insufficiency cannot produce adequate
cortisol.
Such patients therefore require perioperative supplementation — so-called steroid
cover — with additional corticosteroid given to mimic the cortisol response that
they cannot generate, in a dose and duration matched to the severity of surgery,
to prevent an adrenal crisis.
The dose is graded to the surgical stress. A related point is that etomidate
suppresses adrenal cortisol synthesis and so is avoided as an infusion and used
cautiously in the critically ill.
So patients on long-term steroids or with adrenal insufficiency cannot mount the
cortisol component of the stress response and risk an adrenal crisis,
and they require perioperative steroid cover graded to the severity of surgery,
while drugs that suppress cortisol synthesis, such as etomidate,
are used with caution.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of the stress response to surgery.
Drawing the station together, the stress response to surgery is the integrated
neuroendocrine, metabolic and inflammatory reaction to surgical trauma,
and it is central to anaesthetic practice because so much of modern perioperative
care is, in effect, the management of this response.
Its mechanisms are unified: afferent neural traffic and humoral cytokines from the
wound activate the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and the sympathoadrenal
system, raising cortisol and catecholamines, with supporting rises in vasopressin,
aldosterone, glucagon and growth hormone and suppression of insulin;
the result is a catabolic, hypermetabolic state with hyperglycaemia and insulin
resistance, protein and fat breakdown, salt and water retention,
a cytokine-driven acute-phase response, and hypercoagulability.
Protective in evolutionary origin, this response is largely redundant and,
in excess, harmful in the supported surgical patient,
contributing to muscle wasting, impaired healing, hyperglycaemia, infection,
thromboembolism and cardiac stress.
The clinical themes follow directly:
we attenuate the response — most effectively with regional and neuraxial
anaesthesia blocking the afferent drive, supported by opioids, adequate depth,
multimodal analgesia, minimal-access surgery, normothermia, euvolaemia,
carbohydrate loading and early nutrition and mobilisation,
the substance of enhanced recovery; we control perioperative glucose;
we give thromboprophylaxis; and we provide steroid cover to those who cannot mount
the cortisol response.
So the stress response unifies the neuroendocrine,
metabolic and inflammatory consequences of surgery,
and understanding it is understanding the rationale of modern perioperative and
enhanced-recovery care.
How does the stress response relate to postoperative delirium and cognitive
dysfunction?
There is growing recognition that the inflammatory arm of the surgical stress
response contributes to disturbances of brain function after surgery,
namely postoperative delirium and postoperative cognitive dysfunction,
and this links the systemic response to an important and common complication,
particularly in the elderly.
The mechanism is thought to involve neuroinflammation.
The pro-inflammatory cytokines released into the circulation by the surgical insult
- interleukin-six, interleukin-one and tumour necrosis factor - can influence the
brain, both by signalling across the blood-brain barrier and by increasing its
permeability, leading to activation of the brain is own immune cells,
the microglia, and a neuroinflammatory state that disturbs neuronal and synaptic
function.
This neuroinflammation, superimposed on a vulnerable brain - the aged,
the patient with pre-existing cognitive impairment,
or with other risk factors - is believed to contribute to delirium in the early
postoperative period and to the more prolonged cognitive decline some patients
experience.
Other elements of the stress response may contribute: the hypercortisolaemia,
sleep disruption, pain, and the metabolic disturbances.
The implication is that measures attenuating the stress and inflammatory response,
together with good analgesia, avoidance of deliriogenic drugs,
maintenance of physiology and early mobilisation, may reduce these complications,
which is an active area of research.
So the cytokine-driven neuroinflammation of the stress response is thought to
contribute to postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction,
especially in the vulnerable elderly brain,
providing a further rationale for attenuating the inflammatory response and
optimising perioperative care.
Briefly, what is the proposed link between the stress response,
immunosuppression and cancer surgery?
An intriguing and clinically important hypothesis links the stress and inflammatory
response of cancer surgery to the bodys ability to control residual tumour,
and although unproven it has driven considerable research into anaesthetic
technique. The reasoning is as follows.
Surgery to remove a cancer inevitably risks shedding tumour cells into the
circulation and leaving micrometastatic disease,
and the bodys defence against these residual cells depends substantially on
cell-mediated immunity, particularly the natural killer cells and cytotoxic T cells.
The surgical stress response, however,
produces a period of immunosuppression - through the immunomodulatory effects of
cortisol and catecholamines, the compensatory anti-inflammatory phase following the
cytokine surge, and the effects of pain,
hypothermia and transfusion - that depresses precisely this cell-mediated,
natural-killer-cell immunity at the very time it is needed to eliminate residual
cancer cells.
The hypothesis therefore proposes that a larger stress response and greater
perioperative immunosuppression might permit more tumour to survive and so increase
the risk of recurrence, and conversely that attenuating the response - for instance
with regional anaesthesia, opioid-sparing techniques and good analgesia - might
preserve immunity and improve cancer outcomes.
This is biologically plausible and supported by some laboratory and observational
data, but large randomised trials have so far not confirmed a clear benefit of one
technique over another, so it remains an unproven hypothesis.
So the proposed link is that the stress-induced immunosuppression of cancer surgery
may impair the cell-mediated defence against residual tumour,
raising the theoretical possibility that attenuating the response improves cancer
outcomes - a plausible but as yet unproven hypothesis.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The stress response is the integrated neuroendocrine (HPA axis and cortisol,
sympathoadrenal catecholamines, raised vasopressin, aldosterone, glucagon,
growth hormone; suppressed insulin), metabolic (catabolic,
hyperglycaemic with insulin resistance, protein and fat breakdown,
salt and water retention) and inflammatory (cytokine,
acute-phase) reaction to surgical trauma.
Second, It is driven chiefly by nociceptive afferent neural traffic from the wound
plus humoral cytokines (notably interleukin-6),
and its magnitude and duration are proportional to the severity of surgery.
Third, Protective in evolutionary origin but largely redundant and harmful in
excess in the supported patient - causing muscle wasting, impaired healing,
hyperglycaemia, immunosuppression, thromboembolism and cardiac stress - so
attenuating it is a goal of modern care.
Fourth, Regional and neuraxial anaesthesia is the most effective means of
attenuation (blocking the afferent drive,
best for lower-body surgery and the neuroendocrine arm), supported by opioids,
adequate depth, multimodal analgesia, minimal-access surgery, normothermia,
euvolaemia, carbohydrate loading and early nutrition and mobilisation - the
substance of enhanced recovery.
Fifth, Patients on long-term steroids or with adrenal insufficiency cannot mount
the cortisol response and need perioperative steroid cover graded to surgical
severity; control perioperative glucose and give thromboprophylaxis.
Thank you. That concludes the station.